account for
the okay we are
recording uh we're going to call to
order this second meeting of
the uh Charter review commission today
is Tuesday May 28th I have 6:05 PM we
have in attendance myself jod gross Jeff
Maguire Adrien mandaville uh the folks
in town hall carolite tell me their
names
again Pat Billings and Karen Mador thank
you and members of the public Katherine
magaldi
Lewis uh
Louise forgot the goodwi Goodwin Leanne
Hutchinson and uh
this is lean that's that is me okay you
appeared twice here that's
interesting she appears twice because
she doesn't have speaker on her computer
gotcha thank you you're welcome you're
familiar with all this Jeff let's go all
right so we are called to order uh the
next agenda item is public
speak any members of the public will
just uh will'll just pull them Katherine
yeah I have a couple of things
please uh I was looking at the minute of
uh the
22nd and I had asked for two things I
had asked to change the name from the
board of selectman to the select board
and for the chat to hopefully you
probably maybe be in English but neither
one of those are in
minutes um the other thing was I know
that Shannon had given specific sections
that she wanted or asked to please be
reviewed but I couldn't find those
sections there either and I just thought
you know if those were specific sections
that she she was good enough to ask
about that maybe we should have those
specific sections in the minutes and the
only other thing I wanted to add too
which I didn't have before was um also
adding page numbers to the chatter and
the
index and that's it thank
you thank
you Louise goodwi
uh I'm all set thank you thank you
Leanne yes thanks um you you may cover
some of this but I had a couple of
questions um slash concerns one is that
I don't see much in the way of specifics
about what you've actually been charged
to do this time around um it doesn't
seem like there's been too much
publicity about this so um it seems to
have come up Suddenly um whether it has
or not I wonder if you are able to
respond now or if it's going to become
apparent as to actually what you're
charged with doing and um and and how
that came
about um it will become apparent a
little bit I can say we don't have a
formal charge but I have a list of
personal items Bob Bob just as a point
of reference it's public speak you just
allow them to talk and you don't have to
respond to them I mean it's not a
negative lean we will do it Bob is
correct but you don't have all right to
be clear I I think um Bob is chairing
there are no he can set the rules
however he likes so if he wants to
respond he's has the option to do that
we want to as a group decide to respond
or not we have the option to do that so
I think um given the limited amount of
people that showed up it's not a big
deal but that's up to the board if we
want to make rules for public speak then
we need to make them otherwise you said
it's up to Bob so Bob it's up to
you we have a few enough people here
that I don't mind responding especially
since what Leanne is is asking I have an
answer for so if anybody else wants to
jump in that's fine also um what I
started to say Jeff was that some of
what she is asking I have a little uh
list of action items here that I want to
get to and some of what she's asking
will be
answered
so okay thank you um yeah I'm I'm glad
you're going to get to that because as I
said I haven't I looked at the minutes
from the last meeting and there um you
know it was pretty
um you know didn't seem to have a lot of
um explanation about discussion which is
fine but but those are the things I'm
interested in I do understand that for
example the board of selectman has
people speak but then doesn't
necessarily have a dialogue with them
right away so I appreciate you um you
know your answer here Bob because I know
it can be done either
way all right uh that's and and Bob
since since we're responding just to let
Katherine know the actual meeting
minutes from the special meeting didn't
have anything from that public hearing
that was before the special meeting so
there were actually two meetings last
time so I I don't know what was
published but the actual special meeting
minutes to what the public speak of the
and the public speak at the beginning
didn't have anybody say anything that's
why you didn't see their comments there
well actually the note that I have I
don't know if this has been made public
yet Jody but um there was some overlap
between what was uh in the the public
speak in the uh in the hearing as well
as the items that we then kind of
reviewed again in the uh in the the
charter meeting so I I've got a we'll
get no no no there wasn't overlap no I
think it's I think I think Jody's point
is that there were two separate meetings
technically and so that correct when
when Catherine gave her input that she's
talking about select men to select board
and you know being more plain English
and Shannon's comments all were in that
public hearing so they weren't recorded
in the minutes of our meeting you shared
and I was secretary just making that
point okay so
noted all right thank you anything from
the
public all right so that brings us to
discussion and possible action upon any
Charter I can barely read what's on my
computer here
um Pardon
Me Charter revision issues okay
so I created just for my own edification
here a little action item list that I
wanted to go
over just uh kind of referee as I said
in the last meeting I see my job mostly
as a traffic cop and a referee for this
um one of the questions that Leanne
asked is and the the charter revision
process itself calls for a set of
recommendations or a charge from the
board of Selectmen to the commission and
as far as I understand we have not
received any such formal communication
from the board of Selectmen now luckily
we have the first Selectmen here um Jeff
can you tell us are we going to receive
a formal charge from the board of
Selectmen no you will not receive a
written charge from the board of
selectman the board of selectman
discussed the various issues at our
meeting not in great detail but every
Charter commission committee has the
authority to do what it sees fit
related to what it would like to change
within the charter so you won't see a
formal
document okay so relating to that then
just for clarification you brought up a
number of uh different comments
suggestions ideas relating to potential
Charter revisions so just to clarify
these are your input as a citizen of the
town and don't reflect anything official
from the board of Selectmen well again
the board of Select has to approve
everything that this Charter revision
committee does before it it gets sent to
referendum so if the I if the board of
Selectmen does not approve what is done
here it will not move forward in
totality it could be totally scrapped we
could be wasting our entire time and it
could be totally scrapped or it could
all move on again right doesn't really
address what I just asked you so the
source of what what you vocalized here
last week is not I'll take it as my
personal opinion okay that's fine just
just for the record okay so again real
quick Bob go ahead yeah was there
anything in then I didn't go back to
specific meetings and try to find it was
there anything in notes no noted did you
guys actually put anything in the notes
as far as for what spe specific things
were brought up I know Eric had some
comment commentary in a couple meanings
but was there anything put forward at
all nothing nothing documented no okay
so just the things that Eric had talked
about but but nothing beyond that okay I
just wanted to clarify that's all thank
you Bob sorry okay now thank you for the
input so
um I have free rain Bob where do you
want to go excuse me kind I have free
rain Bob where do you want to go do you
got an action list or I do actually and
this is so um I have the the draft
meeting minutes that Jody put together
and I've taken that along with the draft
special uh the the excuse me um public
hearing minutes that were put together
and I
have a list of items here and really
what where I was going with this is
between the public input and the
commentary made by the commission there
are several potential changes that were
put forward and one of the things that I
want to get done tonight is to codify
and clarify and prioritize prioritize
these changes into a formal list okay
you know specific measurable actionable
things that will serve as our official
charge moving forward um
and what those things comprise at this
point just to go through them uh their
bullet points that jod put together
dollar amounts to trigger Town meetings
early voting dates of Elections aligning
the board of education budget timing B
Bob do you mind just is it possible if
you to screen share those so we can have
that for the public can I screen share
those let's
see uh the Green Arrow at the bottom I
see points up
yep Bob whatever is on your screen will
appear please know that yep I see
let me just hang
on let me just make sure that the screen
is clear or sanitary at
least
okay how's how's this look thank you so
much okay so I was going through that
list that I've got here so this was the
the
draft um that jod had put together and
as I said I I kind of gleaned some
things from there as well as from the uh
public hearing and this is what we've
got kind of as our as our list of bullet
points so dollar amounts early voting
elections town clerk
position uh change to a Town Council as
a legislative body alternatively keeping
the board of Selectmen but merging
theard of functions and uh Board of
Finance functions and eliminating the
board of Finance uh Major versus minor
ordinance
procedures uh not having a first
selectman but instead have a chairperson
like the Board of Ed Board of Finance
planning and zoning and town meeting
adjustments so this is a nice overview
10,000 foot level but this isn't
something that's really actionable so
what I'd like to achieve tonight among
the commission members here is to turn
these single bullet items into a few
sentences a paragraph something that
somebody reading it can say aha um
before we go ahead and do that let me
just share this is this is my notes here
that I've been reading off of um one of
my goals in codifying this into a a list
of specific items is that I would like
to suggest that for each action item
that we defined that we have one or more
members assigned to be an advocate or a
champion for that item and that person
will have ownership of the item research
it present it defend the idea of
subsequent meetings Okay including
what's being proposed how it will be
implemented what any transition would
look like from how things are being done
now what the implications and
ramifications would be on the rest of
the charter and beyond that the greater
Town functioning and governance um
anybody else who wants to to contribute
to that advocacy and similarly anybody
who wants to argue against it this isn't
intended to lock anybody out but it's
intended to make each item uh have a
point person that that can own it and
advocate for it and the idea here here
is to spread the labor and keep any one
individual from hogging to Spotlight so
we each act as an advocate and we each
Act you know uh jointly in the capacity
to adjudicate and decide upon the
outcomes uh can you just slide that
window over so we can see the what was
the very last thing on your sheet yeah
hang on action
items there we go town meeting okay town
meeting adjustments okay so that's kind
of my my goal for Where We Are Tonight
hey hey Bob so it was really an advocate
was there a contrarian for each I'm I
just I forgot what you said there no I
wouldn't Define a specific contrarian
anybody can be a contrarian okay at
least you want someone that's an
advocate or someone that's really trying
to dig into it to try to drive is this
an issue to right and anybody anybody
can jump in and help and be another
Advocate if they want but I want there
to be a specific owner at least one
owner for each idea there well but I I
think there's a difference I think
someone can be an owner and not
necessarily be an advocate I think there
I think it would be be better if
whoever's doing it can present both
sides you know I mean I think that you
need to prevent a fair argument so I may
be completely for something but at the
same time it's still my responsibility
as you mentioned Bob to say what the
effects are that of that change may be
so there may be some negative effects of
that and I don't think it's I don't
think it's a bad idea to have that
person if they're doing the research
anyways to come forward and say hey well
you know changing this may be good in
this way but there here are some
repercussions that may happen if we do
that as well so I I agree with Adrien I
think that's a great idea
Pros cons position as an owner to the
extent that somebody can can fairly and
and uh dispassionately argue both sides
of an issue absolutely um okay you know
my my oversight this is why we have a
committee and not just one
person okay um and then the other thing
related to that is I think before
proceeding in depth in the review of
these items I think it would be helpful
if we had a preliminary poll of the
commission on their initial opinion of
the soundness of each item so we can
gauge how readily the commission might
approve or reject and how much effort we
might want to put into into these things
um it would be nice if we can do this
without really coloring the
decisionmaking process but I think it
kind of helps to know before going
really into depth you know what I was
thinking here is before you take a uh a
case to trial there's an evidentiary
hearing and you want to see you know how
strong it it's kind of the same concept
that you know do you have something
strong here do you have something weak
it's it's maybe it's not the best
analogy but I I think it might help us
any thoughts on this you want to Grand
Jury this yeah let's
go hey yeah hey Bob I I have another con
concept I wanted to put on the table go
ahead I I'm I'm sort of of this camp
that I would rather have two or three
impactful items if we had to spend what
limit time we have as opposed to you
know
smaller changes right and that's just my
personal View and I don't know if that
color sort of how we tackle this list
well Jody what what about if we I I
think I think I like Bob's idea in the
sense that if we if we all agree that
let's say there's five of these or six
of these that that we all agree that we
should attack or tackle I should say if
we do that and we say well listen what
are the what are the least what are what
are the things that are the easiest to
pick off like we need know we need to do
dollar mounts early voting things like
that right so maybe three of these are
really easy and low hanging fruit and
maybe we pick two that are more involved
yeah agreed so I was going to piggyback
a I was gonna say a little bit more
first there usually a bucket of
technical changes sure in these types of
things that are um you know some of what
Shannon Lowden said in in um in public
speak right oh this word or that needs
to be cleaned up um but I I like where
Adrians go and in the sense that maybe
we could we could try to size it too as
you know as we go through it this is a
bigger issue um and it you know maybe a
small medium large in my business we
call it t-shirt
sizing
right Bob I I'll I'll sit there and I'll
second what you did I really do think
you need to sit there and Whittle this
list down if there are items that the
group The Seven members uh there's not
four people that want to move forward
with a given idea there's no reason to
waste any time
yep okay do you think we could do that
right now thoughts let's go yeah I would
just like if we do this before we vote
on an item let's just do a quick any any
quick comments so for instance if we
talk about dollar dollar amounts for for
for Town meetings I think we need some
feedback from Eric before I would say
yeah or nay on that totally but I think
initially we have to do it right so some
Adrian isn't the issue that that setting
a new dollar amount would be appropriate
and then you'd say okay let's move
forward with that idea and then come up
with the dollar amount that's that is
Meaningful and impactful yep so I want
to have just a little bit like this for
each yeah no problem let's go yeah okay
for what it's worth I mean I was kind of
hoping that we could do this without
getting into the weeds tonight you know
that we stay at the 10,000 foot level
okay and not not get get caught up in
the details yep okay so just give us 10
seconds 15 seconds whatever I'm just
saying a little bit before we say y or
no okay so do we need to follow Robert's
rules on all of these things or can we
just informally say yay or nay and go
down the list I think we I'm okay with Y
or nay and go down the list you know
with any any quick comments on each one
that's all okay um how about this is
there anyone who is opposed to tackling
the idea of dollar amounts to trigger
Town
meetings no
okay okay so we're GNA keep that
yep
okay early
voting now what does that actually
comprise I mean again again without
getting into too deep details we talking
about opening up the voting window for
general elections to a week or two weeks
or like that Connecticut state law so I
don't know if it's really something
necessary to put in our Charter we may
have to clean up the charter simply to
remove some of the things that limit
within the charter rather than
add okay is this a line that said we are
following the Connecticut state statutes
right exactly and then pull out anything
that limits
okay so Adrian is this your example of
lwh hanging fruit yes okay anyone object
to
it no not hearing any okay so we'll keep
that uh dates of
Elections I think the the the comment on
that was also about whether we should be
aligning with Hein so that we're because
especially now that we're talking about
going to early voting all these other
things having multiple voting dates that
then require multiple early voting is an
issue Hein already has aligned with the
ram budget for their voting we would I
think it'd be a good idea to do the same
that goes into budget timing in the
charter so it's not NE it's not
necessarily it is a date of a referendum
related to the budget and the timing of
the budget would have to be adjusted
exactly so but the data of Elections
let's just sit there and go an election
is when someone's running for a public
office a referendum is a different it
still falls into the same but it's
talked about differently in the charter
yes so election I think date of
Elections actually felt at early voting
that there there was secondary
discussion about which is again maybe
not necessarily highlighted on this list
about aligning our budgeting for
referendum with Hein
right I'm sorry okay go ahead Carol I
was just going to say if you look at
hein's Town Charter um the way that they
did that so they could vote at the same
time as RAM they eliminated any kind of
a town budget meeting so what they do is
they have the dates very specific in
their
Charter so that they're able to have the
referendum on the first day following or
on the Tuesday following the first
Monday in
met so they really move everything up
with dates as far
as the end of the fiscal year but I'm
just saying trying to say that if we
look at Hein stown Charter which is what
our Charter
was written almost word for word like
that will show us an even P how to do
that in align with PR for our refence
yeah okay okay so does anyone have I
mean I'm sitting there looking at dates
of election I think you right keep and
then I think he put another line under
it Bob to sit there and say referendum
dating and I'd be a keep for that one as
well I'd agree with
Jeff it sounded like the issue was that
our town budget with Rams was the was
the connection there though am I am I
missing what what the point was yeah
that's that's the issue that but the
issue is we have a town meeting where we
have to we'd have to push everything
back if we want to keep the town meeting
we're gonna have to start really early
in order to have time to do it and
there's a risk that if at a town meeting
a budget fails you would get out of
cycle if it failed at a town meeting and
we said no we're not going to send it to
the town versus saying okay the board in
other words their Board of selectman can
just move it directly to a town to a to
a town vote we move it to a town meeting
and then to a town vote Board of Finance
actually it directly to the referendum
after holding their public hearing yes
I'm sorry you're correct Carol okay and
so you'd have to move the public hearing
up to this to the time to a different
timeline there's other issues in our
Charter that would have to be moved I
think there's a there's a plausibility
question and I think that you you risk I
think you got to put it out to the
public if you're going to do that I
don't you know it's going to go to the
public well I think at the end of the
day here we're saying keep it I was just
trying to size it maybe we should just
keep keep moving yeah well also let's
keep in mind that there are things
further on that could completely uh
impact and collide with that also so we
got well why don't you put why don't you
put them in Bob into the simple category
and the more detailed category right so
so the first two the dollar amounts
early voting dates of election are all
simple issues ref let's just keep going
through the list and we'll do that after
y fine well I can I can yeah I I
agree uh town clerk position appointed
versus
elected this has uh gotten a lot of
discussion around town
already well let's start with Caroline
where's she
at I'm I'm still Neal I just would like
to hear both sides I've been doing a lot
of research and taking a lot of input
myself
so just staying open to it well Carol I
mean the reality is if you're against
this the town's not going to approve it
so we don't want to waste a lot of time
on this if you're not going to be in
favor of
it I mean I personally will say right
now I have no problem with saying why
don't you make this your baby and you
tell us what you want to do and you know
if you if you come forward with
something that you can you find
acceptable great and if not then it's
not worth us trying to do anything
else well I don't necessarily think
that this is an issue where we can all
come to some sort of alignment um it may
not be perfect but the Town
Administrator is a perfect example of
this situation we had an elected
official in the first selectman and then
we replaced that with a Town
Administrator
and that individual uh that that job is
now solidified and it's the same thing I
get what you're saying Jeff but the
reality is very simple I understand and
but
ad I'm explaining it for Carol like
because she understands Carol's Carol
understands she's not Carol when you
leave and your next election comes up in
2027 if if you leave and it's an elected
position and someone else runs the town
is in Jeopardy of having someone that is
not as qualified as you sit in that
position and it it be it's not an it's
not an appropriate way to govern okay
Jeff jefff I got I'm cut I'm cutting you
off because we're getting into the
details and I didn't want to get into in
into the details now um I want to
counter adrianne's suggestion uh to me
it's smacks of conflict of interest for
Carol to be the one who I agree who
talks about this I think we need to have
somebody other than her research this
although I think it' be valuable if she
provided input because she's so close to
it well obviously she knows more about
this than anybody else but I think as we
hand these things out this should be
somebody else's responsibility well but
but to the to my point I if I finish it
is that you could have someone and this
committee spend a lot of time on this
and if Carol doesn't agree with it you
know it's never going to pass
when we had when we had the town
administrator's position as Jeff was
talking about we had several people as
elected administrators prior to that
that were a complete show for luck
of a better term and it it behooved the
town to move to someone who was
qualified right now you've got someone
who has been a pillar of the community
for 30 plus years that's universally
loved if that person says no no one's
voting for it and you've wasted a lot of
time on something that that's not going
to get approved so that's my point well
I'd like I'd like to ask Carol Carol
were were you and you won't answer this
but this is the question I would like
you to answer were you in favor of the
Town Administrator when it came up for
vote I had very mixed emotions then too
I thought it was honestly a quick it was
a what a two or three Charter revision
and then it was did the voters on
the you know us I think another presenc
so I really didn't think too much about
it at the time um and I had mixed
emotions then like I have mixed emotions
about town CL too um I think there is a
huge benefit to having a town resident
who
has physical and emotional ties to the
office and with Eric as you just said
Eric is a lifetime
resident so that's a different
thing he's here he has ties to this
community and his heart is here as M
so I still have mixed emotions about
elected and appointed as
elected person has real tie to the
community a love for
Community they're
established so I see both
sides yeah I say we keep it and I think
adrianne's point is if Carol's gonna
really be opposed to this we should know
that very early um and I Jeff your point
is well taken I mean perhaps there's
even um there's some maybe there's some
sort of hybrid that could be created
right that there
are um you know maybe I don't I don't
know if this is possible but is are
there elected officials that'll have
certain qual it's an elected thing that
people have certain qualifications for
or um I don't know if that's something
that's
allow have a certain level of business
professional experience or this level of
degree or this you know and it's still
elected Jody the flip side of that is it
could be a hired position with a
residency
requirement or residency preference yeah
but I mean
policeman agreed and that's a hybrid too
agreed I understand so I'd say we keep
this and Adrian's point I think it was a
good one if Carol's gonna say n you know
we shouldn't even touch this then we
should know that early and it I'm not
hearing that from her well listen
Carol's next election is in 2027 it's
this change cannot go into effect until
after 2027 and to be really honest if
Carol wanted the job the people that are
running the town at that point in time
would be stupid not to hire point taken
all right so let's move on it's it's
it's honestly it's keep and if we can
get four keeps we move on okay okay EXC
I'm not we still got one person who has
not said anything is it Miss billing
there in the back actually too Karen
Mador also
where's okay sorry I just unmuted Karen
I don't
see thank you face in there hi
we're trying to sit so we can see the
screen here sharing it so it's kind of
tough we're going to get you guys a
bench next time yeah please pipe in
though okay pop in every now and then
okay or or get them some laptops that
they can sit in front of so everybody's
got their own camera I offered I offered
mine but to no avail but it looks like
the Muppet's over there everybody's
every now and then somebody just leans
in you know yes exactly all right moving
on
we have a bunch of things that I think
are uh in inter inter interchanged with
each other so we have the concept of
changing the Town Council changing to a
Town Council form of government um or
alternatively keeping the board of
selectman but merging the board of
Finance functions um there's there's a
lot of things that are all all put
together and uh Jeff you've been the the
champion for this the The Advocate the
the spokes person
um say a little bit more for
us well I mean this is just something
where the group has to sit there and say
I do not want to waste a lot of time on
this I do believe that the town would be
better served and and I'll I'll list out
the reasons you have a board of Finance
it's a seven member committee and you
have a board of Selectmen that's a five
member committee so you have 12
volunteers that are essentially
uh not doing the same exact work but
they are working in parallel and with
the current situation where we have that
many volunteers and that many
un contested elections that have gone on
and trying to find volunteers I do
believe that a Town Council that would
absorb the roles and responsibilities of
the board of Finance would be more
appropriate for our community now
I will sit there and I will tell
you that the last budget that was put
out came to the board of Selectmen and
by the time it got through every meeting
that was required to it and through to
the town meeting it changed by a total
of $166,000 and that's occurred probably
on the the last five or six budgets that
have gone before the town the last
budget that had any major changes to it
was when a was the chairperson of the
board of finance and that was six years
ago seven years ago so how I would do it
would be I'll just give you a high level
view I would sit there and it wouldn't
go into effect until 2027 when the board
of selectman is up for
re-election uh I would turn that over
into four members running for election
to whatever the new board is named the
select board or the Town Council
whatever it would be and I would take
the three remaining members members of
the board of finance that still have two
years left on their terms and they would
be the the other three members of that
board and you would have a comingling of
the two boards and then what would
happen would be that board would then be
responsible for the priorities for the
town establishing the financial budget
for the town managing that financial
budget for the town and moving forward
and I'll even go back to this so
everybody understands why I'm
recommending this you got to look at
every portion of the town is it's a $4
million component right now a little bit
harder higher for some of the
educational components so there's 4
million for Ram there's $4 million for
AES there's $4 million for the town of
the $4 million for the town about 1.5
million is capital so you set those
priorities those priorities are
established equipment fire trucks
whatever is
required and the remainder is a $2.5
million operating budget and of the $2.5
million operating budget and greater
than 50% of that budget is is employee
costs so reason why I'm suggesting this
is you'll
have potentially not absolute but
potentially better candidates because
there's smaller number of roles you'll
have a group of people that will move
from one you'll never have a complete
clean sweep on this board which you
should never have
and so you'd go four to three and it
would just make more efficiency sense
because what you'd also have is you'd
have everybody that presents to the
board of selectman and presents to the
board of Finance has to do it twice Eric
has to go to double the meetings and I I
just look at it totally as an efficiency
and the ability to potentially have
contested elections and getting a better
pool of volunteers that's as simple as
it gets nothing else nothing nefarious
uh it may not fly and that's okay I
wanted to put it out there for everybody
to understand that this is how the this
town should run in the
future Jeff how do you um obviously
sometimes people might think about
things like checks and balances where
you have you know in the corporate world
there or even in judicial world you know
in sort of politics and judicial world
and legislative World there sort of you
know you you try to have two two layers
or or two different um you know checks
and balances approach does that is is is
your thinking that this is just so small
of uh there there isn't you know you're
saying it's only $166,000 was adjusted
in a budget that you don't need that
well the issue that I have is and
finally after years and years and years
of trying Jody we finally got to the
point where we reconcile our bank
accounts timely so when you sit there
and say checks and balances we've had
terrible controls within our town for
years and years and years and years and
we finally gotten to the point because
of software and because of people that
we can actually reconcile our accounts
timely so I also look at it as we have
two signers on every check there's very
little that can happen at a board level
to screw it up to be really honest at a
board level this is my personal opinion
as an accountant as a at a board level
at a an operational level and a um in
the the weeds of this there are
possibilities that things could occur um
but again it's a $2.5 million operating
budget at the Town level that this board
would be under control and again 50% of
that is is payroll so I don't look at it
as um as a concern I understand the
checks and balance needs and I
understand the treasury role and and and
trying to do that but um I don't
necessarily know that the board of
Finance um and Adrian would be able to
speak better to this being on that board
I'm not sure that the board of Finance
gets down in the weeds to sit there and
check check and balance the community
the only thing that I look at from my
experience is that you know if there's a
transfer made at the end of the year the
board of Finance needs to approve over a
certain level um but Adrian would be
better positioned for that for point of
reference it really depends on the board
um I know the the board part of me
getting on there and then once I was on
and then even when I was chair we got
into the weeds a lot of the budget but
we did that because we felt that the the
board of
Selectmen that that was sending us a
budget at that time and and the Town
Administrator were not doing their job
but also it had been a it had been a
longstanding policy that every town
Department by Charter actually is
supposed to go to the board of Finance
to present their budget not to not
actually to the board of Selectmen the
board of selectman calling them in and
going through that is a is a process
that was picked up but it's actually not
in the charter going to the board of
Finance is so we took that seriously
when I was on the board of finance and
and the board part in my my being there
took it seriously and went through every
every but Roy is dependent upon the
board and
so that's one part of it and I think
sometimes one you know board select
picks it up sometimes Board of Finance
picks it up I think my personal opinion
is this current Board of Finance hasn't
done that in any way shape or form
they've sort of Taken what the board
select and brings through and for the
most part rber stamped it and I don't
know that that's good either
so okay I just want to jump in here and
and give a thought here which is a
little bit more um conceptual but uh
am I unmuted you're fine yeah okay um a
little more conceptual and something
that I think applies certainly to this
but it applies to everything that we
look at if we're suggesting a change to
the Charter because some practice or
process has become difficult or
inefficient or unwieldy then I think we
need to ask ourselves does the problem
lie in the underlying Structural
Concepts that are delineated in the
charter itself or can we modify the
implementation of those Concepts so as
to streamline the process and you know
the analogy that comes to mind is if the
front door hinges squeak you don't tear
down the house so um you know I just I
just want to throw that in for what it's
worth you know I hear some of that in
what Adrian is saying and um this is
granted it what we're talking about here
is a very big change and so I think we
have to we have to look at this from as
many different angles as we can before
we would seriously consider it and like
I say in theory though Adrian I think
what I heard you say is a board of
Finance as it's structured today a board
of Finance would create a budget
scrutinize it sort of a bottomup
approach scrutinize it from each of the
Departments and then that budget goes to
the Selectmen to approve is that how
that works and then it goes to the town
so that there is a the Town
Administrator generally put forward a
budget and then we would call in each
department to ask them to to justify the
budget that was given to us through the
Town Administrator whether it was the
whether it was the board whether it was
the slackman or whether it was the town
the town admin as it is now they're all
submitting budgets to him and then he's
bring them to us and we would actually
bring each person in and say okay Public
Works why do you want this why do you
want that sometimes Public Works would
say well we wanted this too but but it's
not in there because the you know the
Town Administrator said he we didn't
agree with it so sometimes we would put
that back in if they made good case
sometimes we would take out something
that they wanted and saying you know
based on your schedule that that isn't
allowed this year it's not it's not in
your schedule of purchasing of equipment
so that's not happening this year but so
there is there's there was a lot more
intricacies done in the past you know
getting into the wi and then where would
it go after that board of Finance
creates the budget where does it go
after that have a we'd have several
meetings that were open to the public
and then we would vote that budget to go
to to a town meeting so the board of
Select is not involved at all in
creation of the budget you go by the
charter not really know okay thank you
that helps very much me
understand just to quickly jump in if
you read section 400 of the Town Charter
that delineates all the duties of the
board of
Selectmen
701d delineates the duties of the Town
Administrator as far as preparing the
budget for the board of Selectmen and
the board of Finance
final Duties are with the board of
finance and that's delineated in section
802 of the charter and that will give
you a clear definition of everybody's
duties um dictated by our
Charter thank you and so what I would
recommend is that you create a seven
member board that would consolidate the
functions of the board of selectman and
the board of finance and you still
continue to
have and and I know I I heard Carol say
something about not a town meeting but
the the the to hearing a budget hearing
being more appropriate but the town
needs to be the community especially the
motivated individuals that come to a
town U town meeting the 47 Hardy
individuals that came to our last budget
meeting um they need to have their say
and I'm I'm all for that I just think
that consolidating those two roles and
making it more streamlined more
efficient and again having the ability
to have potentially contested elections
mean something in this type of in this
small of a town I'm gonna I will say
this and this this this probably the
last thing I'm going to say on these two
things but at least at this meeting um I
think if we are talking about actually
aligning our referendums and that is and
there a risk of of that is that we need
to eliminate the town meeting then I I
don't think you go forward with this
this change as well I think you can do
one or the other but I think you can't
do both that's my own take on it because
if you take away the second board and
the board of
Finance becomes one board with the board
of Selectmen then if you are also then
taking away the town meeting that feels
maybe like you're taking too much out of
the town the town folks hands do I I
don't NE I think in big bigger towns
it's more accepted but I think in a
small town like Andover where there's
still a lot of Desire at least from from
a good portion of the populace to to
have their say whether they exercise it
or not that's their own choice but but
they want to have that option so just my
own take on
it okay so this is clearly an important
subject that everybody has a lot of
ideas on uh but going back to where we
started on this
uh can we reasonably assess its
probability of of getting through this
commission and moving on does anybody
want to come out and say how they feel
yay or nay about this at this point I
just say that I think that taking two
separate boards each whose Duties are
delineated by Charter section 400 and
800 and dumping all of those duties onto
a seven member
board they're putting a lot more on
those seven
members
so I would not I am not in favor of that
at this
time I will stay open to hear things but
I am not in
favor well I I have to say I feel about
the same way that Carol does I'm not
convinced um and I would to try to work
out every detail to streamline the
process within the framework that we
have now rather than tearing it down
okay and just so I don't necessarily
know Bob that tearing it down is a good
term for what I'm recommending I'm
trying to be more efficient with what of
time we have available to us as
volunteers and being on one of the
boards understanding what one of the
boards does I don't necessarily know
that it's that much more work I will
defer to Adrian who served on both of
those boards to sit there and and tell
the committee if it's that much more
work the issue ends up being if it's not
going to get four
votes potentially get four votes please
I do not want to waste my time to sit
there and champion this issue so if
Carol is is is a no and I would
assume that there's you're a nobob let's
go if there's two other people then I
don't want to waste any
time here I say as well because
Adrian knows we are
small
okay one more
yes Adan we are
small I think it's too much
okay let's
go Bob Jeff assumed or no I don't I you
know unless you feel like you want to
voice an opinion I don't think we should
assume your opinion you could say you
don't have it you're undecided but I
don't want to assume you're no I'm 75%
no at this point okay it would take a
very very strong compelling convincing
argument for me to change my mind how's
that
Adrian you were on both boards the
amount of work
required I don't think the amount of
work required is going to go up
dramatically but I think that you would
say that I I would say you're probably
going to
add an hour to a board of selected
meeting you know so whatever you're
doing for a meeting now you're gonna add
an hour to it I think most of the stuff
that the board of board of Finance does
on the day-to-day
stuff you guys already did you know
there's there's a good portion that you
know during budget season that's a
little bit different but again as we
just talked about for some for for a lot
of it it can be repetitive unless you
have really one board digging in
so I don't know that it's that much more
okay uh I'm gonna also vote no because I
don't really want to go forward with the
effort to put this in front of this
Charter committee and then have it be
rejected so it can come up at another
Charter revision committee
okay just a um just to call out the the
folks were having difficulty hearing um
the other folks in Carol's call so when
you guys Karen and Pat when you guys
speak up if you guys could try to come
towards the microphone or the computer
that would be helpful thank you
Bob I think you're on mute
Bob yeah the dog was barking
so um okay so that's a no
on uh going to a Town Council as well as
uh keeping the board of Select merging
the board of Finance both of those
Concepts we're going toh defer
yes all
right
um just since it's kind of related to
that we're going to skip over one here
um it's been suggested that the first
selectman not be separately elected but
instead be selected by the board of uh
Selectmen just like the other uh
commissions and Boards in
town thoughts on this one
I I thought this was a good Jeff
suggested it the other day and I've been
thinking about it and it sounds like a
good one to me I mean I I've observed
several several of the meetings and it
it um it appears that it's very much
facilitation um and um and I think it I
think it works well when that actually
that group can make that election as
opposed to to um you know an
understanding who sort of has the who
has that skill set so it felt felt good
to
me I think I think having an elected
board uh first selectman is a hold over
from before we had a Town Administrator
when we had a strong first selectman and
and you know now old mayor style yeah
exactly and now that we have erican
place I don't think it needs to be a
separately elected position
so I would agree I would also point out
that if we're doing that though we may
want to look at other portions of the
charter that make that
position um the chief of police and the
you know all all these other little
things good point all the downstream
stuff Carol and Pat and Karen anything
on you from you guys on this
one I agree I think it's a good idea to
that way and I think we could increase
number of
candidates maybe two that rather than
just right now it's restricted each to
committee can nominate one for first
select and then
two look into increasing the number I
mean it's five
positions
um you know maybe increasing the number
that the town committees can first and
the number that our electors can
vote Carol can you explain that again I
didn't understand it neither did I okay
so right now the town committees can put
up one candidate for first select and
two candidates for Board of
Select which six people can be put up
for five Deion they open it up and just
do Board of
Selectmen increase the number that the
elect that the town committees can put
forward and that the electors can
vote I think the con oh I'm sorry Carol
were you done I was yes I think the
concept here was that we have five
Selectmen in our town um and then once
those five Selectmen are
elected that board is is created and
then at that point they
elect the
chairperson right but what I'm saying
moving forward with that we may be able
to increase the number of candidates
that are put on the ballot because right
now there are only six people being put
up for five positions
oh I see so positions and eight people
want it Carol where is that in the
charter for electing the Selectmen yeah
the number because really there's eight
PE there can be up to eight people put
up for five positions you'd have the two
because of the way the town Charter is
written there's the first selectman Ray
and then there's the selectman race
correct and each Town committee can put
up two members
no it's three
members yeah SE why I'm asking that's
why I'm asking you where it is in the
charter that says section
401 right number members no more than
three members of such board shall be of
the same same political it doesn't and
and this is that that's why I was asking
you um uh
I would like understand that yeah that's
the that's the that's the minority party
rule like you can only have three me
three members from One party so that
you'd have some minority representation
I don't believe Carol that there's a
limitation on the number of candidates
any party can put up yes there are and
that's with our election if you remember
the ballot from this past November right
yeah you
Scott and Ann were on the Democratic
line and Adrian Jeff and Paul were on
the Republican line but you see this
goes into my this goes into my whole
point Carol about uh elections and and
contesting and not contesting um the one
election I'd call you back to Carol was
the first one I ran in I think 2014 or
whatever it was um when we had a little
bit of an uproar in the town and and um
Kurt
Rand right and we
hadt you
had you had Kurt running and then you
had Steve Willard and Kathy D roers but
you also had Jay
Lindy right Jay and Bob Burbank were
petitioning candidates and they both won
on the petitioning candidate long okay
and and and that's what I'm asking where
in the charter does it say that the
Democrats and the Republicans can only
put up two
candidates they can only win three
seats right
so I'm gonna have to look that and and
and why Carol looks at that I'm just
going to tell you that the reason why I
put up the board board of Selectmen or
the first selectman as a
um I'm not sure that as a five member
board it will work
appropriately so I'm just telling you I
put that up because I would go to a
seven member board but you can keep it
well we could Jeff that's still viable
idea I think the the if you if you think
that expanding the number no see Jody
it's not that it's not the number the
there there are um there are very good
people I I would I would reference our
current board um very diverse group
different parties all smart Common
Sense do what is right for the community
um the the previous board was the exact
same way very smart different different
groups um if you do a five member
board um Jody what you're saying is not
always going to happen because politics
are always being played in some
way so they're being played in our
Charter revision committee so you have
to understand those all that that's
going on and you can sit there and put
up the the the first selectman or the
chairperson is chosen but uh I don't
necessarily know that it works really
well with a five member group versus
seven member group so so our Charter
says in two 203 a a political party May
nominate no more than three members one
of whom shall be the designated nominee
the
office okay okay well then then then
Carol I 100% agree that you should allow
more people to run I am a big believer
in contested
elections so so so Jeff did you believe
if you believe that this was part of
your other seven member board idea and
bringing it together and you want to
take this off the table and explain why
no listen this is not me I I am one
member of a seven member committee but
you're the one who put it on the board
you put might be a good idea for
everybody else for me it's it's not it's
no longer a good idea so you want to you
want to oppose this idea I will say no
but you've already had five different
people that four different people that
had said it's a good idea we have we
have we're we're talking about the idea
Jee we haven't rendered opinion of the
idea per
se so and just like with Carol I think
you're you're you know as Adrien said
with Carol I think your your thinking
being in this role is something we want
to hear well I just don't believe that
in a five- member board it works as well
as it does in a seven member board
that's that was my opinion you have a
larger group you have more people you
have the ability to sit there
and and not allow politics to totally
sway everything that you do to do what
is right not what is politically correct
for your party yeah but to my I'll point
this out so when I was on the board of
Finance
we purposely elected Dan Warren who was
a Democrat even though the Republicans
ran the board at that point and we did
that because at that point in time he
was the most qualified person for that
spot and we felt
like he could navigate both sides of it
you know so I I think there is
opportunities on boards when boards are
open to it to look at the candidates and
say that are that are on that board and
say you know we've got a bunch of
Republicans on this board but maybe
maybe the people that want it are too
political if we have a Democrat or if we
maybe you have Democrats that say hey we
have a republican that'll cross the
aisle let's let that person run this and
and that way it'll feel more fair for
everybody so I I think there's
opportunity there I think it's politics
will always play A Part whether listen
doesn't matter who's chair of the board
politics are always going to play a part
in the board on some level but I I still
I personally agree with the this idea
that know that that that that position
is is put forward by the board to pick
who's going to be the person guiding
them you
know I think it definitely has value on
a seven member board I think it has
value on any board personally okay all
right let's let's move on uh I one of
the things that just came out of that
discussion as a potential action item is
to expand the number of possible
candidates for the board of Selectmen
I'm going say I'm a no right now yeah
you're going in the reverse direction
we're having a pro we're having a
problem both Republicans and Democrats
are both having a problem putting enough
candidates forward for all the positions
that are open in town qualified
qualified I think qualified or not
qualified I still I think on both sides
it's hard to get people that that that
want to run you know because these
positions they take time and they take
energy and and you can you know I I
think most people realize and say well
even if I'm qualified maybe I don't have
the bandwidth for this so all right well
I I penciled it in I just took it out
never
mind something else that I just put in
also while we were chatting that I've
heard uh uh bandied about and while
we're talking about Board of Selectmen
is splitting the board of Selectmen
terms right now everybody is up for
election every four years the other
boards and commissions have split terms
is this worth considering
I think staggered terms on the board
select really good idea because it gives
continuity to the board um the way that
our Charter and that's if our Charter is
if we're changing the charter on if
we're not there's a chance that we're
going to end up with the majority of the
same select but if we do change the
charter the number that
are on the ballot there is a chance that
we'd be using the entire board with a
history of what was going on so stagger
terms I do think are good on every barl
even though I agree with you I agree
with you that stagger terms are
appropriate but you are now you are now
putting so much Authority into the
Democratic town committee and the
Republican Town committee because
there'll be three members that are in
one cycle and there's two
Republicans and there's one Democrat and
now the Democrats put up two people and
the Republicans put up one person the
Republicans can only gain one
seat it's it's a rigged
election and it will be a rigged
election I mean and it's difficult even
sever member board but you can't do it
on a five member board I see your point
no I agree you could you we should
because continuity is a huge huge piece
of it well I mean the upside is that you
do have continuity on the manager's
position the town manager so no 100%
Adrian and that that was the best thing
that we did 100% it was the best but
your point is valid that it does make it
a lot harder for the for the other
party yeah it's gonna it's
gonna Carol I agree I would do it I
would do it with a seven member board
when you're having four people run and
three people run but if we keep minority
representation which we were we're
required to do it's a lot less than a
seven member it's only two people from
the other party in a seven member
committee so you think about that you
know you got five open seats and uh the
Democrats could run five people and you
know to to
win the seats I mean it's just it's hard
Carol it's hard on a five member board I
can sit there see the math working so
that you have two people in one election
and you're just only focused on getting
one person elected and getting one
person that number of votes and it's
they're gonna get they're gonna get put
on they're
gonna gonna get put on I hear what
you're saying Jeff but if you look at
section
1013 transition of our current Charter
okay and if you go and look under Zoning
Board of
appeal there was a trans IAL and that
was a five member board yeah okay at the
regular municipal election to be held in
May of 99 there shall be elected three
members for a term of four years and two
members for a term of two years and that
was to phase in this
transition um then it said at the
regular municipal
election
2001 there is a way to phase it in for
the transition lause in the charter um
yeah but do
that Carol I agree but you have to get
to Seven members on that board and if
you go to seven members on that board
and seven members on the board of
Finance you are splitting your resources
and your available candidate so far that
it's
counterproductive in my estimation I
only humbly from having to deal with it
I'm just telling you so you can do it
and you guys can sit there and say that
you want to have uh um U you
know the terms the terms alternate three
and two three and two you're going to
come back with a really difficult
process because the parties are going to
control even more than they currently
control I wasn't saying to increase
number on the board of and I was just
saying to increase the number that the
electors of our to and vote rather them
just increase the number so there's more
candidates that are able to put
up I I agree I agree Carol with that it
was the staggered terms concept of
32 yeah I would say right now I would
say notice dagger terms if the boards
stand as they are
so but but but let's go to Carol's Point
let's go to Carol's Point sorry Bob
I agree with Carol more candidates I
agree with that way more
candidates why is staggered terms
appropriate for some commissions and not
for the board of Selectmen because as he
out there's only five there's only five
on the board of Selectmen there's only
five on Planning and
Zoning not as it's not quite as
political as border of slman is
exactly then when's the last time we've
had a when's the last time Bob because
you've been there when's the last time
you had a contested election in planning
zon
don't know I'm sorry it's it's rather
quiet Bob I couldn't hear that what was
that don't know I know I was elected to
uncontested so contested
yeah all right so but Carol's idea is to
change I think it's to change section
203a where it says a political party May
nominate no more than three
members and I think what she's saying is
why are we limiting to
three I think you could probably
eliminate the four that might be a
fairer and then minority party
representations is going to force you to
you know you wouldn't get more than
three on even if you ran four so well
this is what I was saying before opening
up to allow more candidates and
everybody said well we can't find
candidates
now I I listen you were you were you
were saying to expand the current Board
of Selectmen to seven total me
I wasn't well
that's I put that I put that to think
about yes because put seven in general
when you were combining the two so Jeff
when you said you you're meaning you
Jody not you Bob is that I'm sorry I
heard Bob I thought Bob meant to say
that he he was thinking of expanding the
current Board of Selectmen to seven
members Jody's a vist yeah yeah okay my
bad I'm sorry
I had my eyes down I was reading the
charter no that's fine that's fine okay
so can strap that move on say no to this
okay I would also I would put though
increased number of candidates don't we
have that I had it and then I took it
off oh you just you had it and you took
it off why'd you take it
off just like you just like that delete
key p and and Karen any any input on
anything we talked about I know they're
over there doing planting or something I
don't we're not doing
planting girl got them trying to work or
wind cell she needs more
plants we're very shy right now okay
speak up if there's something you guys
wantan to in most definitely thank you
all right we're almost at the end here
so uh Town meetings adjustments does
anybody know what that's
about the idea is that you would align
and if we're not I think we definitely
should look at this especially if we're
talking about not doing the Town Council
idea if you adjusted the town if you
adjusted when we have our not just our
town meeting but I think it really that
was supposed to be more about budgeting
and town
meeting with your
referendums wasn't that though to
increase the threshold of
grants and things like that that Force
us to go to a special meeting is what I
believe that was about that's the first
that's the first one dollar amounts to
trigger Town meetings it's on our list
okay oh town meeting adjustments
okay I think this is aligning them with
when they happen but I think we we now
have molded that into referendum voting
that's now five is that five one two
three four four car
you said something at the last meeting
about the town meeting versus the Board
of Finance public
hearing what what was what were you what
were you addressing on that were you
addressing that the town meeting could
really be morphed into the public
hearing no I was just saying if we were
going to try to align
Our Town budget referendum with the ram
referendum them that would mean that
they would have to move everything up
like I was looking at the Hein Charter
because they as you know did that and
there's
um they're in the middle of April rather
than the end of April with their public
heing and then like I say they don't
hold it Town budget
meaning directly to repent so
I was insane to merge the
two the I'm not sure but I'm I'm pretty
sure that there
the does have to hold
hearing yeah I think I read that that
they required a hold stat right public
hearing and then after the public
hearing they set the budget and and
Adrian you'll know this but they move at
the town the town meeting the town
meeting votes and then we go to
referendum there's a lot of detail as
to if we don't have enough people for
the town meeting and well what you could
do though what you could
do this just hypothetical but you could
still have a town budget
meeting but the town couldn't at that
meeting you couldn't reject the budget
but you could reduce it so you could
still do the thing you do
now and then move it to a town a town
vote and still allow people to have a
say but not necessarily reject it it's
currently now if it gets rejected at a
town meeting it goes back to the board
of Finance you could move it to a full w
a full Town vote you could still keep
the town meeting in place as a way for
people to line item things they disagree
with the same way we do now but then
once that line item is pulled it would
then go to a town
vote and that would kind of be the happy
medium so you still keep the town
meeting
so that people can have a say on you
know because usually people don't
usually show up to these things to to
add things they show up because they're
mad about something that's too high you
know they don't want their taxes to go
up so you still give them that
opportunity but then you still try to
keep it on schedule and then if
if go ahead no go ahead I just why can't
you move why can't
we and I know it's difficult but why
can't we move here's the thing if you
move it you don't have a way to force it
if you still keep the town meeting as is
in the charter then that budget can be
rejected and sent back to the board of
finance and then it screws your whole
schedule up going forward then your
referendum doesn't work to to line it up
with
Hein I'm with you so under 802 in in in
the section c it says additional duties
it's
5c right the board of Finance shall hold
at least one public hearing you know why
don't we merge that public hearing and
the town meeting into one activity it
still doesn't prevent them from saying
no and messing up your schedule I
understand but without saying no so the
board of Finance listens to what
everybody says now the board of Finance
is still in a regular session they can
go up and go down based upon what they
hear in that meeting and then the board
of Finance would pass that on to the
referendum because the one thing that
people love and tell meetings right now
doesn't happen often but they love right
now in in the you know in the 14 years
I've been living in town the one thing I
have learned is when you go to a town
meeting it it makes people satiated to
at least be able to have a vote about
taking things out now it doesn't always
happen but the fact that they can if
there's an issue if they can if they can
line item something well for inst I'll
give a perfect example if the Town
Tractor had been at a at a at a meeting
it would have probably gotten pulled but
instead it was on a small little side
thing and and it got approved but if it
had been that town budget it probably
would have been pulled out as a line
item so those 46 residents would have
controlled that item yep and that's why
people that's why small towns are small
towns we let it happen now right and it
makes people happy do I agree with it
all the time no but but it happens
um and I can tell you I can tell you
though you
know you know there were Town meetings
that were contentious that that budget
got voted down and sent back to the
board of finance and I can tell you one
of them was one eliminating the state
trooper was
proposed right so people want a say the
question is how do you give it to them
okay so I would sit there and and
your F your take is that by going to a
full wide Town boat that's the me that
that's their
say right well that is that is the
ultimate say is you went to referendum
and you allowed people to come and
exercise their right to vote and
personally I don't disagree with that
but I I think everybody on the board
would you know that's does anyone else
have an opinion on
this I'm not even sure what we're
discussing to be honest do you keep the
town meeting
right now if in order to do the
adjustments right to merge them and keep
on a schedule you have to eliminate the
town meeting you can't just merge it you
have to eliminate it or have it but not
have the public have the ability to
reject the budget at that point the
board of Finance could make an
adjustment to it but the town and maybe
you have the town residents be able to
make an adjustment but no matter what at
the end of that meeting you would have
to structure it so that it has to go to
referendum
you wouldn't be able to have them say no
at the town meeting to the budget and
send it back to board of Finance you
could arrange it so that it
automatically goes back to board of
finance and they have a set and and they
do what they want but no matter what at
the end of that town meeting a budget
has to be sent to referendum full stop
and that is for us to be able to hold a
referendum for the town at the same time
as RAM because the date for a regional
referend is set by
Statute that is the Tuesday following
the first Monday of May so that's why
when Hein redid their Charter they said
that the um Board of Finance shall hold
a public uh hearing on the recommended
budget not later than the third Tuesday
in April and then within one week after
the public hearing the board of Finance
shall present a budget for vote at the
annual budget referendum and that budget
referendum is
the so I think this is a keep because
it's connected to the referendum one
above right
Yep this is the much more
difficult us saying we want the election
till it coincide with the the regional
Ram referendum it's easy to say well and
it makes a lot of sense to do this
because with the expanded voting it's
going to be a little more taxing now on
the on the register of Voters and on the
on the polling folks you're putting a
lot on them right now with this early
voting and then if we have early voting
and then a ram referendum and then our
referendum it's just it's it's it's a
lot of work okay so so a I would ask
I'll ask everybody is it can we merge
the public hearing that the board of
Finance has to have and the town meeting
without having the town like keep it at
as an open meeting until a budget is
finalized like that meeting could go on
for for
days it could go on for hours and the
board of Finance would have the ability
to adjust their budget on the flly well
we do have showers in the community room
the new ones do we have it in a
filibuster the gym too filibuster are
you suggesting like the Board of Finance
has their public hearing then it
adjourns to the budget meeting but we
don't take a vote people motions to no I
think you have the budget meeting and
then it adjourns to a board of Finance
meeting to then push it to referendum
and and it could come back it could come
back to the to the open public hearing
the are we solving for this here or do
we just want to say keep and move
forward
forward I'll vote for that yeah out the
details later but fairly complicated
sounds like
yes well thank you is that
keep I'd like to hear Carol and the
ladies they haven't identified
themselves as ladies I think you need
say keep and move forward with that
please K Mador keep and move forward
okay we have a majority
of oh so now we don't want to hear from
Miss
Billings are you keep your keep move
forward yes okay so now we we have a
yeah we um we skipped over one thing
here just because it was kind of out of
order the ordinance procedures Major
versus minor again can we Define what
what exactly we meant by
that it's basically taking out the
difference between major and minor and
giving the board of Selectmen the
authority to create an ordinance without
having to go to a town
meeting so if we were to do that
um I just pulled a lot of like different
procedures from different SS Hein is one
so they have in section 405 power of the
rule for ordinances adopted by the board
of
Selectmen um
and believe it was
Southington
um they have at least one public hearing
five days of notice given by
publication um so we would have
to I don't know if I I don't know that I
would be in favor of this thing that all
ordinances could be
enacted by the board of Selectmen
without public hearing
and you'd have to vote on some I I know
ordinances we have day-to-day operation
I just think we have to clarify and give
greater definition to minor versus major
and I've been trying to research a lot
of other towns how they do
with my take is I I I would disagree
with you Carol on that I think that you
allow them you allow the board of Select
me to do both but I think for
clarification sake we should have in the
charter in that section What towns
people need to do in order to repeal
one and I'm hearing you on that but just
like when I was talking about at our
first meeting about town clerk elected
versus appointed I said that the town
clerk position is the only elected
official that there is a statute to
remove that elected official if they
were not doing their Duty and Dennis
it's a long drawn out
process the same thing with a resident
having to petition an ordinance to have
that ordinance
So based on that same thing with it
being a long drawn out process to remove
an elected town it's a long drawn out
process for someone who may not
understand the process but it but it
doesn't have to be that's my point we
can make the threshold
lower we can make the threshold lower to
push an ordinance to a or you could say
you can't pass an ordinance unless it
goes to a town instead of having a town
meeting which I think again you don't
have enough people show up to instead of
having a town meeting have it go to have
it go to a you know go to your
referendum on your yearly voting you
know why couldn't you do you're saying
to have an ordinance go and be on a
ballot why not why not I I I don't
object to that um but I'm just saying
for the board of selectman to just enact
an ordinance um some of the ordinances
is
um you know the blight ordinance first
one we had we had over a hundred people
that showed up to that a couple
years so people do show up for those but
realistically they they again you're
saying you know a lot of times we don't
have a 100 people the majority of the
times we have 40 or 30 and they're
making a decision so you have less than
you know you have what 1% of the the
voting public is making a
decision correct which is a horrible way
to run a town yeah and I hear you but
that's 30 people or 40 people versus
five five that are elected by
3,200 not 40 very vocal people but I
guess they're elected right yeah c
Katherine put in here actually a pretty
good point in the chat you know what is
Major what is minor and actually when I
when this came up that's what I was
thinking it's like look if it's if it's
a $50 below fine let the bard of or
whatever it is $100 200 whatever let the
board of selectman do it it's something
that's major that the town should do so
again I'd be in favor in keeping this
and trying to have someone work work
something out to bring forward this
group
for reference A50 $50 a day fine is500
bucks a month
so whatever the number is you get into
the per currence or not per day sorry
but you end up getting into the nuances
of it do you know what I mean trying to
Define Major versus minor becomes so
complicated I think it's better to say
you let the board of selectman do it and
then you give people away if they
disagree with it to repeal it and make
it easier the state has a statute that
says got to do 10% blah blah blah we
could actually lower that that threshold
and say if you get 5% of the previous
voters to to sign a petition then that
then that ordinance instead of going
into you could have a 90-day hold and
instead of it clicking at 90 days and
becoming an ordinance if someone gets
the petition together and they get 5%
then it automatically has to go to a
townwide
vote you know you can do something as
simple as that okay we're not going to
decide this tonight okay we're we're
trying to decide whether we're going to
move forward on this
so and can I just add one thing Bob for
Jody jod the board of Selectmen are
already empowered to set fees and fines
we have an ordinance on the books that
allows them to do that okay thank you
Carol you're
welcome I think uh a better definition
however challenging it may be uh a
better distinction between major and
minor is certainly in order I can't find
anything in i Frank I frankly don't know
what the difference
is nobody does that's the problem and
you're going to define something that
nobody's going to agree with so good
luck Carol one one question I thought I
read somewhere where it talked about the
number of pred petitioning uh residents
needed to revoke
something do you have that section for
me like are you saying in the charter in
the charter yeah I thought there was
like there I thought there was a
a number like 5% and they had to have
their signatures
verified I'll find it later it's okay
I'm in favor of going forward with that
because again it's one of those
inefficient
issues um okay is the way is the way
that I just defined this what what we
intend
y That's fine all right well I I would I
would sit there the board of Selectmen
is already allowed to make minor
ordinances it's a question of what's a
major ordinance that's really what the
question is it's a definition of what
the board of selectman has the true
authority to do without bringing it to a
town meeting yeah and I think and I
think the other point here is what is
the right voice for the town right not
having a public not sending a town
meeting is okay but I I think I heard
Adrien suggest is there notice or is
there something that goes into you know
Board of Selectmen meetings and then
they're gonna vote on it you know two
meetings from now or one meeting from
now to give the town public speak time
something like
that so Section 105 of the charter Jody
defines in h a minor ordinance but it's
a
very like gray it gives a couple of
examples
um so I've been looking at other Town
Charters to try to see how they Define
Major versus minor
um let's all agree just to move forward
on this you know it may not it may not
go anywhere but somebody needs to to
dive into this so it's it's keeping of
moderate
complexity well I like I want to hear
your definition of moderate then
It Ain't Easy it ain't rocket science oh
that's that's right you are almost a
rocket scientist so this would probably
be very very simple for
you I have designed things that go into
space yes thank you very
much all right so we have actually gone
through all of these things I I
highlighted in yellow the things that we
said were relatively simple the Adrian's
loow hanging fruit um maybe I should
highlight and R the ones that we call
complicated I don't know um so in
keeping with what I was
proposing uh do we have anybody that
wants to step up and say I want to adopt
this or that you know right from the
start anybody who feels strongly
attached to any of these Concepts and
wants to grab
them I'll work on the Ordinance
one okay
there we go that's one down why don't
you change the colors so we can see who
what belongs to
who thank
you wait a
minute didn't mean to highlight
the there
okay uh
I'll I'll jump in and do the dollar
amounts to trigger Town meetings I
mean I would suggest you reach out to
Eric on that he had some starting points
I think
okay good suggestion thank
you town clerk position that's an
important one I think for the amount of
conversation we had about it anybody
wna anybody other than
Carol come on we need some volunteers
I'll work on that one as well all right
thank you
Jeff you're going for the hard ones
huh let's go you took the the one I was
going to work on away so let's move on
yeah I understood
here since I'm not on the board of
Selectmen let me look at the uh
chairperson
concept Carol there must be something
that feel strongly
about um I can go ahead with the
referendum
voting
aligning this one here okay it sounds
like you already had done some research
on that I did do I've kind of been
looking at a lot of stuff anyway okay
um and then so I guess that would run
hand inand with the town meeting
adjustments emerge
for to finance budget public hearing and
that
so they are
related I can go ahead and just grab
both of those
okay oh you know what I'll take um I'll
take the town clerk then so Jeff doesn't
have two we're running out of things to
assign okay Jeff you all right with
that sure have had it well I'll sit
there and make my my points on
it Karen Mador I'll take early voting
and
dates I couldn't hear you she's gonna do
early voting early voting and dates of
Elections okay take both those okay
Patty with Patty Karen and Patty
together we get I didn't know we could
do things as a
[Laughter]
group always a first is it Patty with an
i or or y i or
Y well maybe it's IE why are you
limiting her it's a
y well I guess you can put me down for
that um increased number of
candidates relatively simple yeah
okay Jody is that with a y or an i
[Music]
all right
uh and uh Karen and Patty you said you
do dates of Elections also
yes I think we've got everything
assigned everything that we decided to
keep
so can you can you refresh the memory
what's the charge for these individuals
that are assigned to each of them all
righty let me bring that back
on back over
here
okay
[Music]
so research
present I won't say
defend
uh Ros cons maybe yeah research present
uh do we have to build diaramas like
what's going on
here only just V just vend
diagrams I mean he's got like six bullet
points that took up a whole
page he must not have been able to sleep
last night I did this in 15 minutes this
afternoon oh my God yeah no I think we
get it research it Pros cons and present
that to this group well not just that I
mean okay what's being proposed how it
will be implemented what any transition
might look like for you know considering
how things are done now what are the
implications and ramifications on the
rest of the charter and greater Town
functioning okay I want a a real broad
you know to the extent that that you can
think through these things you know we
should give them their their their due
uh due
diligence me no know much me just give
you
paper now B do a paper can you send us
your little I shouldn't say your little
your actionable sheet here yeah Bob
actually if you could send me that
action item and sort of bulleted what
the expectations are for each of us I
can add it to the minutes yes I will
clean this up and I will cut and paste
from this and I'll send it to everybody
thank you thanks PRI minut speaking you
can memorialize it yes do we need to
approve the previous minutes and as a
side note do we want to grab the notes
that Dennis made from the previous
public hearing and include those before
approving
um that's a good question I we don't
have those as agenda items and we can't
add those to the agenda well you have
approval of minutes right we don't
actually oh well then we don't have to
address it yeah we're gonna have to put
it on next week's meeting motion to
adjourn uh wait there's the the next if
we're done with the the stuff that that
we set out to do there is another public
speak so do we have any members of the
public left we have Leanne we have we
have Katherine U so anybody want to say
anything I do Katherine hi good meeting
guys I I just I'm a little confused
about things um you went through these
with the intent of are we going to go
forward with it or not to have a
discussion I feel like some things were
just like the Town Council or whatever I
never heard really any research done on
that whether any pros and cons on that
and it was just decided yeah we're not
doing it and that that confuses me and
the other thing that confuses me is
having Carol I disagree with the fact
that car I think it's unfair to have
Carol um going through her
own definition of what if she should be
elected or um appointed I think that I
think of these should have researched in
pros and cons um and I just it seems
like every time we go into it it just
seems like there are so many areas
within the chatter itself that if we
took a look at and rewarded or reworked
it it we might work out some of these
issues that we have here there may be
better ways in which to do things just
by taking some of the definitions of
that chatter and reworking them so that
that's I'm like I said I'm just confused
because I don't know
what I I'm just not sure of what the op
what what your options were here or what
your objectives were here was it just to
like take things off the table and if
that's so fine I just I just got
confused somebody can say something it's
okay uh Leanne do you want to say
anything yes um about the two or three
things about the ordinances I can't
imagine why that the blight ordinance I
think is an excellent example um I can't
imagine why it would be a good idea to
take away the option of having a public
hearing um you know leaving aside the
idea that we're not sure what a major
and minor ordinance is ETC um I can't
imagine it would be a good idea not to
have public input and have people
um have a chance to express how they
feel about ordinances because some of
them can be very far-reaching and I
think discussion of that ties in a
little bit with discussion you've had
about the town meeting um this is still
a very small town and I am not in favor
of anything that's going to cut down on
a lot of
representation at public hearings and
town meetings um I'm I'm going to
disagree with the idea that was stated
tonight that
it's not a good rate to run a town by
having you know fewer than 100 people
any given number at a town meeting um we
just had Memorial Day people have fought
and died for our right to show up and
cast a vote and there's always going to
be people who can't attend a town
meeting but I feel very strongly that
the people who get themselves there
should be heard and should be able to
cast a vote even if it still goes to
referendum
I don't think that's a poor way to do
things um there have been Town meetings
that went my way so to speak on any
given topic and there have been votes
that didn't you know that I was in the
minority of but I don't think you should
take away any opportunity for people to
show up again even if it's a a budget
meeting that still goes to referendum I
think the people who take the time to
get themselves there should be at least
listened to
appreciate that Leanne um pardon I
appreciate appreciate your input Leanne
um I know we're not compelled to respond
but Katherine I I've been thinking about
what you just said and I just want to
kind of go back over how we got to where
we got which
is Bob the meeting the meeting is
recorded we we went over all this right
yes let me it's it's it's fine I I don't
mind I don't mind spending a minute or
two just just to clarify this so
nominally when the board of Selectmen
owers this panel to exist there is some
sort of charge we haven't been given one
so the items that we've collected have
been a result of informal discussion
between various Town members as well as
input that was solicited at the last
meeting last week at the uh the public
hearing and the uh the special meeting
from those inputs we compiled this this
input you were free to give whatever
input you wanted if you felt that there
was something that should have been
included that was the purpose of the the
public hearing uh as well as what you're
saying right now um and if you have
further input it would be great if you
would put it down in writing and submit
it it certainly can be you know we can
certainly look at it we're not trying to
lock anybody out but the flip side of
that is that we have a very short time
scale here just because of the way
things worked out um when we were imp
panel and when the deadlines are in
order to get things on the ballot when
you work backwards and look at this has
to be presented to the board of
Selectmen and Y yada yada yada so with
that in mind uh I propose that we look
at all of these things and make a first
pass because we know that we're not
going to have enough time or enough
bandwidth to give everything the proper
consideration and I think we had more
discussion here on some of the the
details and implications than I had had
envisioned and I think that was good
because it allowed us to make a somewhat
informed decision you know the the the
the true test of of leadership is the
ability to to come to a conclusive
decision with incomplete uh incomplete
information and so I I have to thank the
the other members the other committee
members here for their ability to think
on their feet and come to some
conclusions and make some decisions it's
not an ideal or perfect process it's
just the best that we can do give the
people that we have in the time that we
have
available thanks Bob
okay anybody else have anything that
they want to add motion to adjourn
seconded all in favor I I all
opposed unanimous so we are adjourned at
7:53 pm thank you all
thank you thank
you and I will stop
recording good job Bob